Post-Execution transaction and SDM specs (#908)
ethereum-optimism/specs: specs/protocol/lagoon/sdm.md

document specifies the version-1 payload and how clients apply the included refunds.

[EIP-1559]: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1559

## Activation

SDM is gated by a per-chain timestamp activation rule. When SDM is active for a block, the block MAY contain a
post-exec transaction; when SDM is inactive, the block MUST NOT contain a post-exec transaction (see
[post-exec.md § Block-Level Structural Rules](./post-exec.md#block-level-structural-rules)).

SDM has no scheduled hardfork activation. It MUST NOT activate as part of any hardfork up to and including Karst.
Until SDM is scheduled into a hardfork, every production block MUST be produced and validated with SDM inactive.

## Payload Schema (Version 1)

When `version = 1`, the [post-exec payload][g-post-exec-payload] is RLP-encoded as:

```text
[version, blockNumber, gasRefundEntries]
```

| Field              | Type                | Description                                                                                                   |
| ------------------ | ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `version`          | `uint8`             | MUST be `1`.                                                                                                  |
> | `blockNumber`      | `uint64`            | The L2 block number containing this payload (see [post-exec.md § Block Number](./post-exec.md#block-number)). |
> | `gasRefundEntries` | `list<SDMGasEntry>` | Non-zero per-transaction gas refunds.                                                                         |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `version`          | `u8`             | MUST be `1`.                                                                                                  |
| `blockNumber`      | `u64`            | The L2 block number containing this payload (see [post-exec.md § Block Number](./post-exec.md#block-number)). |
| `gasRefundEntries` | `Vec<SDMGasEntry>` | Gas refunds. Exactly one entry per refund. A transaction has either zero or one refund.                                                                        |
```

Reviewer: nit: I don't think it makes sense to use golang types in the spec going forward.

### `SDMGasEntry`

Each entry in `gasRefundEntries` is an RLP list of two fields:

| Field       | Type     | Description                                      |
| ----------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------ |

> | `index`     | `uint64` | Transaction index within the block (zero-based). |

Reviewer 2: Do the indexes need to be ordered? Are duplicates allowed?

Reviewer 2: I see below that ordering is required, and strictly increasing rules out duplicates.

> | `index`     | `uint64` | Transaction index within the block (zero-based). |
> | `gasRefund` | `uint64` | Gas refund for the transaction at `index`.       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `index`     | `u64` | Transaction index within the block (zero-based). |
| `gasRefund` | `u64` | Gas refund for the transaction at `index`.       |
```

> | `gasRefund` | `uint64` | Gas refund for the transaction at `index`.       |

Reviewer 2: Is there a requirement for this field to be nonzero?

Reviewer 2: I see below that it is.

### Validity Rules

A version-1 payload is invalid if any of the following hold:

> 1. `gasRefundEntries` is empty.

Reviewer: What happens if there are no normal transactions in the block?

Reviewer: Or if there is one normal transaction, but it does not qualify for a refund?

Reviewer: to answer my own questions:

1. there will be no PostExec txn.
2. there will be no entry and possibly not PostExec txn.

2. Any `SDMGasEntry` has `gasRefund == 0`.
3. Entries are not ordered by strictly increasing `index`.

> 4. Any entry's `index` does not refer to a [`Normal`](#transaction-classification) transaction in the block.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we can avoid using "normal", which is effectively new nomenclature here. What if we just state the byte range that the `type` of the referred to transaction is allowed to fall into?

Reviewer 2: Or if we still find it useful to use "normal", we can at least use the byte range to define it more concretely.

Author: we could use "User" instead of "Normal", what do you think? I think `Transaction Classification` clearly explains what's meant here, no?

apply in addition to the rules above. If the sequencer assigns no gas refunds, the block has no post-exec
transaction.

## Transaction Classification

Every transaction in the block is classified as exactly one of:

| Kind       | Source                                                | May have refund? |
| ---------- | ----------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
| `Normal`   | A regular user transaction.                           | Yes              |
| `Deposit`  | A [deposited transaction][g-deposited] (type `0x7E`). | No               |
| `PostExec` | The post-exec transaction (type `0x7D`).              | No               |

Deposits buy gas on L1 and have no L2-side gas-price to refund. The post-exec transaction carries SDM data only;
it charges no fees and consumes no gas.

## Gas Refund Semantics

For each `Normal` transaction at index `i`, define `refund(i)` as:

- the `gasRefund` value in the payload entry whose `index == i`, if one exists; otherwise
- `0`.

The refund value is sequencer-defined block data. Clients use the included value directly when executing and
validating the block.

> ## Canonical Gas

Reviewer: I still feel we are re-defining what canonical means, which is potentially confusing for non-SDM aware users. I would suggest either 

    Under SDM we redefine canonical gas to mean ..

or consistently call it `sdm_canonical_gas`.

Reviewer 2: I agree "canonical gas" is not really sufficiently self-describing and could be taken to mean different things. So best to either come up with a more descriptive name, or explicitly define it (or both).

Author: I explicitly defined it. I am hesitant to rename it now, as this is what the implementation is also using.

## Settlement

Because the EVM initially charges fees using `evmGasUsed(i)`, SDM applies a balance settlement for every `Normal`
transaction with `refund(i) > 0`.

### Per-Recipient Deltas

Let `r = refund(i)`, `p` be the transaction's [EIP-1559] effective gas price, `b` be the block's base fee, and let
`operatorFee(g)` be the operator fee charged by the L1Block precompile for gas usage `g` at the active spec
(post-Isthmus).

| Recipient                         | Adjustment | Amount                                                              |
| --------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Sender (`tx.from`)                | credit     | `r * p + (operatorFee(evmGasUsed) - operatorFee(canonicalGasUsed))` |
| Block beneficiary                 | debit      | `r * max(p - b, 0)`                                                 |
| Base fee vault                    | debit      | `r * b`                                                             |
| Operator fee vault (post-Isthmus) | debit      | `operatorFee(evmGasUsed) - operatorFee(canonicalGasUsed)`           |

> The sender credit equals the sum of the recipient debits. The L1 fee vault is not adjusted: L1 cost is independent

Reviewer 2: I could not verify this invariant. Specifically when `p <= b`, the equation does not seem to balance?

of L2 gas usage.

### Application Rules

Settlement is applied after the transaction's EVM frame finishes and before the transaction state delta is
committed. It is atomic with the transaction and does not produce a separate receipt.

If any debit would underflow, the block is invalid. In normal operation this cannot occur, because each recipient

> was just paid the corresponding amount by the EVM in the same transaction.

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by "normal operation"? Is there any mode where this can occur, other than in the case of a bug?

## Producer and Verifier

Under SDM:

- The sequencer executes the block, chooses the non-zero `gasRefundEntries`, and appends a post-exec transaction iff
  the entry list is non-empty.
- A verifier enforces the post-exec envelope rules and the SDM [validity rules](#validity-rules), then applies the
  refunds from the payload when computing canonical gas, settlement, receipts, and block gas usage.

## Receipt Extension

The post-exec transaction's own receipt carries no SDM-specific fields (see
[post-exec.md § Receipt](./post-exec.md#receipt)).

The JSON-RPC receipts returned for `Normal` transactions are extended with a single additional field:

| Field         | Type                            | Description                                                                                                                     |
| ------------- | ------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `opGasRefund` | `Quantity` (`uint64`) or `null` | The SDM gas refund credited to the transaction, or `null` when SDM was inactive for the block or the transaction had no refund. |

Reviewer 2: Is this a breaking change for ecosystem tooling? For example, `cast receipt`?

## Backwards Compatibility

Until SDM is scheduled into a hardfork, blocks are produced and validated identically to a chain that has never
specified SDM: no post-exec transactions appear, no canonical-gas adjustment is performed, and no settlement runs.

When SDM is scheduled, two changes become observable:

- A `0x7D` transaction may appear at the end of any block produced after activation, exposed through the same
  transaction-list interfaces used today.
- The receipts of `Normal` transactions in such blocks gain the `opGasRefund` field; clients that ignore unknown
  fields are unaffected.

Mempool and transaction-pool interfaces are unchanged: post-exec transactions are not user-submittable and do not
propagate over the public transaction-gossip protocol.

## Security Considerations

**Sequencer-defined amounts.** Refund amounts are part of the sequencer's block data. Consensus only constrains their
encoding, target transaction, and application bounds.

**Cross-block replay.** The post-exec transaction's `blockNumber` field anchors each payload to its containing
block. A payload from one block re-injected into another fails the envelope `blockNumber` check.

> **Settlement underflow.** Any settlement debit underflow invalidates the block.

Reviewer: Can this actually happen with the defined settlement rules, e.g.

    r * max(p - b, 0)

or is it just for adversarial-sequencer scenario?
